.TH HOSTER 1 "August 2024" "hoster 1.10.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hoster \- project-scoped /etc/hosts management
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hoster
.RI [ --verbose | -v ]
.RI [ --help ]
.RI [ --version ]
.IR command
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hoster
keeps a project's
.I /etc/hosts
entries inside the repository, scoped per environment
.RB ( lcl ", " dev ", " hlg ", " prd ),
and applies them on demand. Every contributor sees the same host pairs
alongside the code and can swap them in and out of the system hosts
file with one command.
.PP
The system hosts file is resolved at runtime from
.B $OSTYPE:
.I /private/etc/hosts
on macOS,
.I /etc/hosts
on Linux,
.I /c/Windows/System32/drivers/etc/hosts
under Git Bash / MSYS / MinGW.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Create an empty
.I .hosts
repository in the current folder, populated with empty
.IR hosts.lcl ", " hosts.dev ", " hosts.hml ", " hosts.prd .
.TP
.B add \fIIP HOSTNAME \fR[\fI--ENV\fR]
Append an entry to the named environment's host file. If the IP is
malformed
.B hoster
exits non-zero with an
.B INVALID IP
message.
.TP
.B remove \fIHOSTNAME \fR[\fI--ENV\fR]
Delete a matching entry from the environment's host file. Matching is
anchored on whitespace, so
.I www.example.com
will not over-delete
.IR www.example.com.staging .
Has
.B rm
as an alias.
.TP
.B list \fR[\fI--ENV\fR]
Print the entries for one environment, or for all four if no flag is
given. Each block is preceded by a banner with the environment name.
.TP
.B edit \fR[\fI--ENV\fR]
Open the environment's host file in the configured editor.
.TP
.B apply \fR[\fI--ENV\fR]
Insert the named environment's block into the system hosts file. If
the project already has a block applied for that environment, it is
replaced atomically through a temp file. Requires
.BR sudo .
With no environment flag,
.B apply
walks every populated environment in order
.RI ( lcl ", " dev ", " hlg ", " prod )
and applies each.
A snapshot of the pre-apply system hosts file is saved to
.I .hosts/backup/<timestamp>-apply-<env>.hosts
before each mutation.
.TP
.B clean \fI--ENV\fR
Reverse of
.BR apply :
remove the project's block from the system hosts file. A no-op with a
message when nothing is applied. Requires
.BR sudo .
A snapshot of the pre-clean state is saved to
.I .hosts/backup/<timestamp>-clean-<env>.hosts
right before the mutation; the no-op path skips the backup.
.TP
.B status
Scan the system hosts file for the current project's marker blocks
and print the list of environments currently applied.
.TP
.B validate
Sanity-check every env file. Reports invalid IPs and duplicate
hostnames as errors (exit 1), and malformed lines (fewer than two
fields) as warnings (exit 0). Comments and blank lines are
ignored.
.TP
.B doctor
Diagnose the hoster install: bash version, host file readability,
optional tool presence
.RB ( jq ,
.BR shellcheck ,
.BR bats ),
PATH wiring, and
.I hoster.version
readability. Exits non-zero only if a required check fails.
Run from any directory -- does not need a project.
.TP
.B history \fR[\fIlist\fR|\fIrestore \fIFILE\fR]
Without arguments (or with
.BR list ),
prints the
.B apply
/
.B clean
backups under
.I .hosts/backup/
oldest first.
.BR restore " " \fIFILE\fR
copies the named backup back to the system hosts file, after
first snapshotting the current state to
.IR .hosts/backup/<timestamp>-pre-restore.hosts .
Requires
.BR sudo .
.TP
.B export
Print a JSON document with the project name and the entries of all
four environments to stdout. Suitable for pipe into
.BR jq (1)
or for backup. The format is documented under EXPORT FORMAT below.
.TP
.B import \fIFILE\fR
Read a JSON file produced by
.B export
and overwrite the four environment host files. Requires
.BR jq (1).
Refuses to write anything if the file is missing, malformed, or has
no
.I .environments
key.
.TP
.B diff \fI--ENV\fR
Read-only preview of what
.B apply
would change. Extracts the currently-applied block for the named
environment and runs
.BR diff (1)
against the project's environment file. If nothing is applied yet,
prints the project file as the "would-add" preview.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --verbose, -v
Surface internal
.B run_cmd
invocations on stderr. Consumed in place before the subcommand,
so it can appear anywhere on the line.
.TP
.B --help, --H
Print the common-commands help and exit.
.TP
.B --version, --V
Print the installed version (read from
.IR hoster.version )
and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT FLAGS
.TP
.B --dev, -d
Development hosts (\fIhosts.dev\fR).
.TP
.B --hlg, -h
Homologation hosts (\fIhosts.hml\fR).
.TP
.B --lcl, -l
Local hosts (\fIhosts.lcl\fR).
.TP
.B --prod, -p
Production hosts (\fIhosts.prd\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .hosts/hosts.{lcl,dev,hml,prd}
Per-environment host entries, versioned alongside the project.
.TP
.I .hosts/backup/<timestamp>-<reason>.hosts
Atomic snapshots of the system hosts file taken before
.B apply
or
.B clean
mutate it.
.TP
.I .hosts/config
Optional project metadata. Currently a single recognised key:
.IP "" 4
.B name=<value>
.IP "" 4
sets the project name used in
.B apply
markers (overrides the default of the parent folder name).
Comments
.RB ( # )
and blank lines are ignored.
.TP
.I /etc/hosts
.PD 0
.TP
.I /private/etc/hosts
.TP
.I /c/Windows/System32/drivers/etc/hosts
.PD
System hosts file resolved at runtime via
.BR $OSTYPE .
.SH EXAMPLES
Initialise a project and apply its development hosts:
.PP
.RS
.EX
$ hoster init
$ hoster add 10.0.0.1 api.dev.example.com --dev
$ hoster apply --dev
.EE
.RE
.PP
List every environment, then clean up:
.PP
.RS
.EX
$ hoster list
$ hoster status
$ hoster clean --dev
.EE
.RE
.SH EXPORT FORMAT
.B export
emits and
.B import
expects this shape:
.PP
.RS
.EX
{
  "project": "name",
  "environments": {
    "lcl": [
      {"type": "comment", "value": "# section header"},
      {"type": "blank"},
      {"type": "entry",   "ip": "127.0.0.1", "host": "..."}
    ],
    "dev":  [ ... ],
    "hlg":  [ ... ],
    "prod": [ ... ]
  }
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
Each environment is an ordered list of typed items:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B entry
\(em a host file row with
.I ip
and
.I host
fields.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B comment
\(em a line starting with
.B #
in the source file. The
.I value
field carries the original line verbatim, including the leading
.B # .
.IP \[bu] 2
.B blank
\(em an empty separator line.
.PP
Round-trip is byte-identical: feeding the output of
.B export
back through
.B import
on an empty project reproduces the original host files exactly,
comments and blank lines included.
.PP
.B import
also accepts the legacy flat schema produced by hoster
.B 1.10
and
.B 1.11
(an environment is a list of
.IR {ip,\ host}
objects with no
.I type
field). Imports from those versions continue to work unchanged.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hosts (5),
.BR jq (1),
.BR sudo (8)

